We've seen that you can use negative
start and stop values in a slice. You can
also use a negative step. There's only
one thing to watch out for, and it's
one of those things that's obvious, once
it's been pointed out. If I asked you to
count backwards from 99, and stop when
you reach 100, how would you get on?
You'd tell me it's impossible, of course, and you can't possibly get to 100 by
counting backwards from 99. Well, neither can Python. Now that you know that, you
won't make the most common error that
people make when using negative steps in
a slice. Alright, so let's see some
examples. We want to create a new Python
file called sliceback.
So I'm going to start by typing letters
equals and the alphabet abcdefg etc.
Then on line 3 I'm going to type
backwards equals letters square brackets
25:0:-1 then the closing
right square bracket, and we're
going to print backwards.
Alright so I've created a slice that
starts at index 25, which is the z, and
I set the stop value to 0 and use the
step of -1. So what do you expect
the output to be here? So pause the video
and have a careful think, and come back
when you think you've got the answer.
Alright, so let's run the program now
to see if you were right.
So we get the letters of the alphabet in reverse order
from z down to b. Notice that the letter
a isn't included. We used a stop value of
zero, and slices extend up to, but not
including, the stop value. Before I ask
you another question, let's review what
we've got here, on line 3. Because
we're using a negative step, the start
value must be greater than the stop
value. Our slice starts at index position
25, and it extends down to index position
0, but doesn't include the character
at that position. We're stepping by -1,
which produces all the letters from
z down to b. So my second question is,
what stop value will let the slice
include the letter a? There's two obvious
answers to that but only one of them
works. So have a think and run your code,
to try your answer before starting the
video again. So pause the video now.
Alright so how did you get on? So one
obvious answer; if a slice doesn't
include the position at the stop value,
is to use a stop value of -1.
But unfortunately that's the one that
doesn't work, so if we try that, and use a
stop value of -1,
when we run it,
we don't get any output. So you may have
worked out why. Remember that negative
stop values count backwards from the
end of the sequence. Minus 1 means the
last character in the string, which means
we've requested a slice that extends
from the z up to, but not including, the z,
and therefore we get nothing. The
other obvious answer is to omit the
stop value. Python will default to the
start or end of the sequence, if we don't
specify start or stop values. So it's
clever enough to work out that it should
reverse the defaults when we're using a
negative step. So if I change that now,
get rid of the -1 for our stop. Run
this, and you can see that the code works.
With a negative step, the start value
will default to the end of the string,
and the stop value defaults to the start
of the string. That means we can ommit
our start value as well. So we can go back
and do that, and if we run it now,
once again we get the string reversed. A slice of
::-1 is a Python idiom.
When you see that, you'll recognize it as
reversing the sequence. I'll cover a few
more slicing idioms in the next
video. There's not much else that
I can say about slicing backwards. Just
use a negative step and make sure the
start value is greater than the stop
value. Experiment with different values
and make sure you're comfortable with
what a negative step produces. I'll
finish this video with a challenge, and
go over the solution to that challenge
in the next video.
That's your challenge. Have a go at that,
and as mentioned, I'll go through the
solution to it in the next video.